.Dd January 3, 2023
.Dt WVTAG 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm wvtag
.Nd manipulate wavpack metadata
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm wvtag
.Op Fl options
.Ar
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
applies the specified metadata operations
to each of the specified WavPack source files in this order:
clean, import, delete, write, extract, list.
Note that WavPack metadata is stored in APEv2 tags, and
.Nm
will automatically import from an ID3v1 tag
if it is the only tag present in the source file,
and that ID3v1 tag will be deleted and replaced with an APEv2 tag
if an edit is requested.
.Ss OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -allow-huge-tags
allow tag data up to 16 MB.
Embedding > 1 MB is not recommended for portable devices
and may not work with some programs,
including older versions of WavPack.
.It Fl c
extract cuesheet only to
.Pa stdout
(equivalent to
.Fl x
.Dq cuesheet )
.It Fl cc
extract cuesheet to
.Pa source-name.cue
file in same directory as source file
(equivalent to
.Fl xx
.Dq cuesheet=%a.cue )
.It Fl -clean , Fl -clear
clean all items from tag (done first)
.It Fl d Do Ar Field Dc
delete specified metadata item (text or binary)
.It Fl h , Fl -help
display this help
.It Fl -import-id3
import applicable tag items from ID3v2.3 tag
present in DSF and possibly other files into the APEv2 tag.
If there are > 1 MB cover images present, add
.Fl -allow-huge-tags
to include them.
.It Fl l , Fl -list
list all tag items (done last)
.It Fl -no-utf8-convert
don't recode passed tags from local encoding to UTF-8,
assume they are in UTF-8 already
.It Fl q
Be quiet: keep console output to a minimum.
.It Fl v , Fl -version
Write program version to
.Pa stdout
.It Fl w Do Ar Field Ns = Dc
delete specified metadata item (text or binary)
.It Fl w Do Ar Field Ns = Ns Ar Value Dc
write specified text metadata to APEv2 tag
.It Fl w Do Ar Field Ns =@ Ns Ar file.ext Dc
write specified text metadata from file to APEv2 tag,
normally used for embedded cuesheets and logs
(field names
.Dq Cuesheet
and
.Dq Log )
.It Fl -write-binary-tag Do Ar Field Ns =@ Ns Ar file.ext Dc
write the specified binary metadata file to APEv2 tag,
normally used for cover art with the specified field name
.Dq Cover Art (Front)
.It Fl x Do Ar Field Dc
extract the specified tag field only to
.Pa stdout
.It Fl xx Do Ar Field Ns [= Ns Ar filename ] Dc
extract the specified tag field into a named file
in same directory as source file.
An optional
.Ar filename
specification may contain
.Sq %a
which gets replaced with the audio file base name;
.Sq %t
which gets replaced with the tag field name
(note that for binary tags, this comes from the data);
and
.Sq %e
which gets replaced with the extension of the binary tag source file
(or
.Dq txt
for a text tag).
.It Fl y
yes to all warnings;
.Sy use with caution!
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr wavpack 1 ,
.Xr wvgain 1 ,
.Xr wvunpack 1 ,
.Lk www.wavpack.com
.Sh AUTHORS
.An David Bryant Aq Mt david@wavpack.com
.An Jan Starý Aq Mt hans@stare.cz
